GIG ECONOMY TRENDS 2023
By:Mark Stiltner |

Fintech & Payment Trends

Published: Apr 14, 2023

Updated: May 02, 2023

The Big Gig Continues to Grow
In 2021 the gig economy industry was a $355 billion business. It’s expected to balloon
to $873 billion by 2028. Besides monumental growth, what gig economy trends can we
expect to see from gig platforms looking to retain and attract more workers?

d

di

i

f

Trend Predictions for 2023
Remote Gig Opportunities will Grow
Technology advances and a growing acceptance of remote work will increase off-site
opportunities in 2023. Companies and platforms offer a wider range of jobs, such as
freelance writing, virtual assistance, online tutoring, and digital marketing, giving more
workers the flexibility and freedom to work from anywhere.

Gig Platforms will Become More Specialized
Catering to specific industries or niches, specialized platforms connect gig workers
with employers or clients in a particular field, such as engineering, healthcare,
creative arts, or sustainable industries. This gig economy trend to tailor features and
tools to the unique needs of different industries, let’s specialized workers find gigs
that match their unique skills and interests more effectively.

The Gig Economy Will Disrupt More Traditional
Industries
Sectors such as manufacturing, logistics, and construction will see the emergence of
gig work opportunities, where workers are hired on a project basis or for specific
tasks. This could enable businesses in these industries to tap into a flexible and ondemand workforce during peak periods or for specialized projects while providing
workers with more options for earning income in non-traditional ways.

80% of large corporations plan to increase their use of flexible
workers in the coming years.

Get Your Report

Total Economic Impact of Rapyd

What’s the ROI of working with Rapyd? Forrester interviewed customers to
discover the ROI of Rapyd solutions.

DOWNLOAD REPORT

How Businesses Can Meet The Needs Of Gig Workers
With the continued growth of the gig economy, new workers are signing up every day.
Your goal should be to lower the barriers to global payouts to support more remote
gig workers. As the industry evolves, it’s important to stay on top of what workers
want and what they need. The United States has the highest global market for gig
workers, but India, Indonesia, Australia, and Brazil are rapidly growing, strong markets.

Fair & Competitive Compensation
Gig workers generally want to be compensated fairly for their work and expect
competitive pay that reflects the value they bring to the job or project. Tech-industry

workers, medical professionals and other specialized gig workers will expect fast and
reliable payments without high-international transfer fees or currency exchange.
Accounts payable departments will need local and international disbursement
platforms that offer Global ACH, currency conversion and clear tracking and reporting.

49% of gig workers said the ability to set their own hours is the
most important factor when working in the gig economy.

More Flexibility
Gig workers want to set their own hours, choose their assignments, and have control
over their work-life balance. Often the key factor in their decision to choose gig work
in the first place, flexibility in scheduling is a top priority for gig workers.

Supportive Work Environment
Gig workers want a positive workplace culture that promotes diversity, equity, and
inclusion. They’re looking for an employer that values their contributions and fosters
collaboration and teamwork.

84% of freelancers are living their preferred lifestyle, as opposed
to 54% of traditional employees.

Get Your Report

Total Economic Impact of Rapyd
What’s the ROI of working with Rapyd? Forrester interviewed customers to
discover the ROI of Rapyd solutions.

DOWNLOAD REPORT

