PERSPECTIVE OFFSHORE WIND DISTRICT ENERGY DISTRICT HEATING +6

Sustainable energy: the power of the future
The continuous rise in CO2 emissions over the last 30 years and growing
global demand for stable electricity, heating, cooling, and transportation
represent a major challenge worldwide. A growing population and
expanding middle class set the global energy scene in flux. The milliondollar question therefore becomes: how do we ensure access to clean and
affordable energy for all and halt climate change, without stalling economic
progress? The answer needs a global response, which is why the United
Nations has chosen energy as the focus of the Sustainable Development
Goal number 7 (SDG 7), aiming to ensure affordable and clean energy for all.

By State of Green | info@stateofgreen.com
3 MAY 2022

Reaching SDG 7: Decarbonization of the global
energy system
Different countries face different kinds of energy challenges. As such, each country must
find their own unique energy model to transition to a low-carbon economy. Some
economies need to strengthen their domestic grid infrastructure to secure a stable
supply of electricity. Others need to take action to reduce the country’s overall energy
consumption. Some already base their energy consumption on energy generated by
renewables. And finally, there are those who are well underway with the digitalisation of
their energy system, rolling out sensors and smart meters, using data to create more
intelligent and flexible energy systems. Transitioning to a low-carbon society marks a
paradigm shift in the energy sphere.
In order to reach SDG 7 and decarbonize the global energy system, solutions like
sustainable energy sources, green heating, and energy efficiency measures must be
implemented. Decarbonisation and economic growth are not mutually exclusive. The
most prosperous societies of the future will also be the ones that are the most
sustainable.

A Fossil-independent society by 2050
Over the past 40 years, Denmark’s energy system has undergone a profound
transformation. Hit hard by the oil crises of the 1970s, we became uncomfortably aware of
our 99 % dependency on oil imports. While the initial changes focused on replacing oil
consumption with coal, Denmark soon realised that this was unsustainable.
Consequently, Denmark shifted its efforts towards integrating the use of domestic
sustainable energy sources into the power grid, making sure that the entire system
became more energy efficient and stable. The long-term goal for Denmark is to become
100 % independent of fossil fuels by 2050. This means that energy demand across the

board – electricity, heating and cooling, and transportation – must be met through the
generation of sustainable energy.
Today, sustainable energy sources cover more than 30 % of our energy needs, with wind
and bioenergy being the largest clean energy contributors. With virtually zero
hydropower resources available in the country, Denmark is yet to find the optimal energy
mix to achieve a fossil-independent society by 2050. The challenge remains, and we have
a lot to learn and explore. One thing is certain: We will not be able to reach the goal alone.
Collaborating with global partners is vital.

Decarbonisation and economic growth – not
mutually exclusive
Long-term, proactive energy policies that focus on cost-efficient solutions enable
significant economic growth. Since the 1980s, the Danish GDP has increased by over 100
% without increasing domestic energy consumption. In the same period, adjusted carbon
emissions have dropped. It shows that decarbonisation and economic growth are not
mutually exclusive. We even predict them to be interdependent in the future. Electricity
harnessed from renewable energy sources such as wind and solar is one of the cheapest
options on the market. This despite the fact that global government support for traditional
fuels across the world still exceeds that for renewables. In Denmark, onshore wind power
is currently the cheapest energy source.

Energy efficiency as a key driver
Buildings account for 40 % of global energy consumption. In energy-intensive industries,
energy consumption accounts for up to 40 % of total production costs. Ensuring
successful energy efficiency deployment in buildings and industrial processes will allow
us to meet society’s energy demand more efficiently and effectively.
Working with energy efficiency measures since the 70s, energy efficiency has become an
embedded part of Denmark’s mindset. Both companies and citizens have been
incentivised to reduce energy consumption. This has been achieved through a
combination of regulatory and economic initiatives, such as:
improved energy standards for buildings

energy labelling schemes for electrical appliances
taxes and subsidies
public campaigns and
energy saving agreements with industry.
In addition, Denmark’s district heating system is highly energy-efficient and has been one
of the key drivers for reduced energy consumption and CO2 emissions from the energy
sector. It utilises surplus heat from electricity production to heat water, piped into and
distributed through the district heating system to provide heat to local areas.

Publication: District Energy

Green heating and cooling for urban areas

EXPLORE PUBLICATION

Energy independence or interdependence?
Should a country strive for energy independence or interdependence in order to ensure
access to clean and affordable energy? There is no simple answer to this question.
However, what we do know is that geography obviously plays a role in how viable either is
for the individual country.
The 70s oil crisis led Denmark to pursue energy independence of other countries.
However, it has become evident for us and our neighbouring countries, that energy
security is achieved via the help of energy import from each other. Significant elements of
the Danish energy system have been developed in close public and private cooperation
with other countries, institutions, and corporations. Through the NordPool power
exchange, Nordic countries buy and sell electricity to balance their fluctuating electricity
production. This ensures energy access, increases security of supply, and enables the
integration of high shares of variable renewable energy in the energy system, thus
providing a reliable supply.

Integrating sustainable energy sources successfully
via holistic and flexible energy systems
Production of clean energy depends partially on the climatic context and natural
resources available to a country. Similar to countries such as Portugal, Germany, and
USA, Denmark possesses an abundance of wind, which is why the production of
renewable electricity is based primarily on this source. In fact, wind turbines supplied 46
% of Denmark’s electricity consumption in 2019. Further increasing the amount of
renewable energy in an energy system requires a strong transmission grid that copes
with fluctuations from e.g. sun and wind energy.
Integrating sectors and systems becomes crucial in establishing a holistic, flexible
energy system across electricity, heating and cooling, gas and transportation. Doing so

enables balancing the use of renewables in a financially viable way, by tapping into the
combined strength of these systems.
Denmark’s integrated system is fully reliable, with the highest level of security of supply in
Europe. However, making a holistic, integrated energy system is an ongoing process, and
we are continuously working towards increased integration via research and
demonstration projects.
Combined Heat and Power (CHP) plants play a significant role in the integration of
renewables into the Danish energy system. Not only do the plants supply the country with
a substantial share of its electricity by virtue of their design, which allows them to store
heat and vary the proportion of heat and electricity produced, they can also alter their
electricity output in response to changes in wind output, and thus help balance the grid.
The Danish Transmission System Operator (TSO) Energinet uses advanced wind
forecasting in the operations of power system control and dispatch. Looking ahead,
energy consumers will become energy producers and thereby help balance the energy
system, both by shifting their electricity consumption during peak periods in response to
time-based rates, but also by feeding locally produced electricity into the grid.

Energy storage: a hard nut to crack
Increased renewable generation requires the ability to store electricity generated by
wind, solar and other renewables for later use. Power-2-X solutions are therefore in high
demand both in Denmark and globally. To date, no battery solutions can store these
immense amounts of electricity. Instead, an integrated energy system, as well as
increased electrification, can serve as storage capacity and thereby help balance the
energy system.
A concrete example is the use of heating storage in the district heating system and
increased use of electricity for heating, accompanied by increased deployment of heat
pumps and electric boilers. Also, power to gas (P2G) and electrification of transportation
through e.g. electric vehicles will balance the system. The Danish gas grid has a
significant capacity to store natural gas. Down the track, it will also be possible to do the
same with green gasses such as biogas or hydrogen, which can be subsequently be
converted to power or heat according to demand.

