Key Points

Climate change can alter where species live, how they interact, and the
timing of biological events, which could fundamentally transform
current ecosystems and food webs.
Climate change can overwhelm the capacity of ecosystems to mitigate
extreme events and disturbance, such as wildfires, floods, and drought.
Mountain and arctic ecosystems and species are particularly sensitive
to climate change.
Projected warming could greatly increase the rate of species
extinctions, especially in sensitive regions.

Overview
Climate is an important environmental influence on ecosystems. Changing
climate affects ecosystems in a variety of ways. For instance, warming may force
species to migrate to higher latitudes or higher elevations where temperatures are
more conducive to their survival. Similarly, as sea level rises, saltwater intrusion
into a freshwater system may force some key species to relocate or die, thus
removing predators or prey that are critical in the existing food chain.
Climate change not only affects ecosystems and species directly, it also interacts
with other human stressors such as development. Although some stressors cause
only minor impacts when acting alone, their cumulative impact may lead to
dramatic ecological changes.[1] For instance, climate change may exacerbate the
stress that land development places on fragile coastal areas. Additionally, recently
logged forested areas may become vulnerable to erosion if climate change leads to
increases in heavy rain storms.
Top of Page

Changes in the Timing of Seasonal Life Cycle
Events
For many species, the climate where they live or spend part of the year influences
key stages of their annual life cycle, such as migration, blooming, and
reproduction. As winters have become shorter and milder, the timing of these
events has changed in some parts of the country:
Related Links

EPA:
Ecosystems Services Research
Climate Ready Estuaries
Other:

National Climate Assessment: Ecosystems, Biodiversity, and
Ecosystem Services
IPCC: Fifth Assessment Report EXIT
NAS: America's Climate Choices EXIT
USGCRP: Climate Change and Agriculture, Land Resources, Water
Resources, and Biodiversity
UNEP: Links between Biodiversity and Climate Change EXIT
U.S. FWS: Landscape Conservation Cooperatives

Terminology

An ecosystem refers to the animals, plants, and microorganisms that live in
one place, as well as the environmental conditions that support them.
Ecosystem services include the products and services provided by
ecosystems, such as food, fuel, timber, water, clean air, and medicines. It
also includes less material benefits, such as regulation of local climate
conditions and aesthetic value or cultural identity.[11]
An ecological threshold is the point at which there is an abrupt change in an
ecosystem quality, property, or phenomenon, or where small changes in one
or more external conditions produce large and persistent responses in an
ecosystem.[8]
A biome is a large, naturally occurring community of plants and animals
occurring in a regional or global land area.
A food web is a group of predators and prey that interact in a habitat or
ecosystem.
A stressor is a factor that reduces the health or productivity of an ecosystem
(i.e., causes stress).

Earlier springs have led to earlier nesting for 28 migratory bird species on
the East Coast of the United States.[1]
Northeastern birds that winter in the southern United States are returning
north in the spring 13 days earlier than they did in a century ago.[2]
In a California study, 16 out of 23 butterfly species shifted their migration
timing and arrived earlier.[2]
Because species differ in their ability to adjust, asynchronies can develop,
increasing species and ecosystem vulnerability. These asynchronies can include
mismatches in the timing of migration, breeding, pest avoidance, and food
availability. Growth and survival are reduced when migrants arrive at a location
before or after food sources are present.[2][3]
Top of Page

Range Shifts
As temperatures increase, the habitat ranges of many North American species are
moving north and to higher elevations. In recent decades, in both land and aquatic
environments, plants and animals have moved to higher elevations at a median
rate of 36 feet (0.011 kilometers) per decade, and to higher latitudes at a median
rate of 10.5 miles (16.9 kilometers) per decade. While this means a range
expansion for some species, for others it means movement into less hospitable
habitat, increased competition, or range reduction, with some species having
nowhere to go because they are already at the top of a mountain or at the northern
limit of land suitable for their habitat.[4][5] These factors lead to local extinctions
of both plants and animals in some areas. As a result, the ranges of vegetative
biomes are projected to change across 5-20% of the land in the United States by
2100.[4]
For example, boreal forests are invading tundra, reducing habitat for the many
unique species that depend on the tundra ecosystem, such as caribou, arctic foxes,
and snowy owls. Other observed changes in the United States include a shift in
the temperate broadleaf/conifer forest boundary in the Green Mountains of
Vermont; a shift in the shrubland/conifer forest boundary in New Mexico; and an
upward elevation shift of the temperate mixed/conifer forest boundary in Southern
California.
As rivers and streams warm, warmwater fish are expanding into areas previously
inhabited by coldwater species.[5] As waters warm, coldwater fish, including
many highly-valued trout and salmon species, are losing their habitat, with
projections of 47% habitat loss by 2080.[4] In certain regions in the western
United States, losses of western trout populations may exceed 60 percent, while in
other regions, losses of bull trout may reach about 90 percent.[5] Range shifts
disturb the current state of the ecosystem and can limit opportunities for fishing
and hunting.
See the Agriculture and Food Supply Impacts page for information about how
habitats of marine species have shifted northward as waters have warmed.
Top of Page

Food Web Disruptions
The impact of climate change on a particular species can ripple through a food
web and affect a wide range of other organisms. For example, the figure below
shows the complex nature of the food web for polar bears. Not only is the decline
of sea ice impairing polar bear populations by reducing the extent of their primary
habitat, it is also negatively impacting them via food web effects. Declines in the
duration and extent of sea ice in the Arctic leads to declines in the abundance of
ice algae, which thrive in nutrient-rich pockets in the ice. These algae are eaten by
zooplankton, which are in turn eaten by Arctic cod, an important food source for
many marine mammals, including seals. Seals are eaten by polar bears. Hence,
declines in ice algae can contribute to declines in polar bear populations.[2][6][7]

The Arctic food web is complex. The loss of sea ice can ultimately affect the
entire food web, from algae and plankton to fish to mammals. Source: NOAA
(2011)
Click the image to see a larger version.
Top of Page

The Pika

The American pika is a hamster-sized relative of the rabbit that is found in
the cold, mountainous of the western United States. Because of their
sensitivity to hot temperatures, the warming climate is causing pika
populations to die off at elevations below 7,000 feet. Of 25 pika populations
studied in the Great Basin between the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra
Nevada, more than one third have disappeared in the past few decades.
However, because of their retreat to colder climates, they are welldistributed in higher elevations and are not endangered species.[5][12]

Climate change is likely the
leading factor decreasing the
populations and shifting
habitat range of the American
pika (Ochotona princeps).
Source: National Climate
Assessment (2009).

Penguins and Climate Change: A Case of "Winners" and "Losers"

Even within a single ecosystem, there can be winners and losers from
climate change. The Adélie and Chinstrap penguins in Antarctica provide a
good example. The two species depend on different habitats for survival:
Adélies inhabit the winter ice pack, whereas Chinstraps remain close to open
water. During the past 50 years, a 7–9°F increase in midwinter temperatures
on the western Antarctic Peninsula has led to a loss of sea ice. Over the past
25 years, the population of Adélie penguins decreased by 22%, while the
population of Chinstrap penguin increased by an estimated 400%.[13]

Buffer and Threshold Effects
Ecosystems can serve as natural buffers from extreme events such as wildfires,
flooding, and drought. Climate change and human modification may restrict
ecosystems’ ability to temper the impacts of extreme conditions, and thus may
increase vulnerability to damage. Examples include reefs and barrier islands that
protect coastal ecosystems from storm surges, wetland ecosystems that absorb
floodwaters, and cyclical wildfires that clear excess forest debris and reduce the
risk of dangerously large fires.[4]
In some cases, ecosystem change occurs rapidly and irreversibly because a
threshold, or "tipping point," is passed. One area of concern for thresholds is the
Prairie Pothole Region in the north-central part of the United States. This
ecosystem is a vast area of small, shallow lakes, known as "prairie potholes" or
"playa lakes." These wetlands provide essential breeding habitat for most North
American waterfowl species. The pothole region has experienced temporary
droughts in the past. However, a permanently warmer, drier future may lead to a
threshold change—a dramatic drop in the prairie potholes that host waterfowl
populations, which subsequently provide highly valued hunting and wildlife
viewing opportunities.[8]
Similarly, when coral reefs become stressed from increased ocean temperatures,
they expel microorganisms that live within their tissues and are essential to their
health. This is known as coral bleaching. As ocean temperatures warm and the
acidity of the ocean increases, bleaching and coral die-offs are likely to become
more frequent. Chronically stressed coral reefs are less likely to recover.[5][9]
Top of Page

Pathogens, Parasites, and Disease
Climate change and shifts in ecological conditions could support the spread of
pathogens, parasites, and diseases, with potentially serious effects on human
health, agriculture, and fisheries. For example, the oyster parasite, Perkinsus
marinus, is capable of causing large oyster die-offs. This parasite has extended its
range northward from Chesapeake Bay to Maine, a 310-mile expansion tied to
above-average winter temperatures.[10] For more information about climate
change impacts on agriculture, visit the Agriculture and Food Supply Impacts
page. To learn more about climate change impacts on human health, visit the
Health Impacts page.
Top of Page

Extinction Risks
Climate change, along with habitat destruction and pollution, is one of the
important stressors that can contribute to species extinction. The IPCC estimates
that 20-30% of the plant and animal species evaluated so far in climate change
studies are at risk of extinction if temperatures reach the levels projected to occur
by the end of this century.[1] Global rates of species extinctions are likely to
approach or exceed the upper limit of observed natural rates of extinction in the
fossil record.[1] Examples of species that are particularly climate sensitive and
could be at risk of significant losses include animals that are adapted to mountain
environments, such as the pika; animals that are dependent on sea ice habitats,
such as ringed seals and polar bears; and coldwater fish, such as salmon in the
Pacific Northwest.[4][5]
Top of Page

References
[1] IPCC (2014). Settele, J., R. Scholes, R. Betts, S. Bunn, P. Leadley, D. Nepstad, J.T. Overpeck,
and M.A. Taboada. Terrestrial and Inland Water Systems. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee,
K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R.
Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.) Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA.
[2] CCSP (2008). The Effects of Climate Change on Agriculture, Land Resources, Water
Resources, and Biodiversity in the United States . A Report by the U.S. Climate Change Science
Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research. Backlund, P., A. Janetos, D. Schimel,
J. Hatfield, K. Boote, P. Fay, L. Hahn, C. Izaurralde, B.A. Kimball, T. Mader, J. Morgan, D. Ort,
W. Polley, A. Thomson, D. Wolfe, M. Ryan, S. Archer, R. Birdsey, C. Dahm, L. Heath, J. Hicke,
D. Hollinger, T. Huxman, G. Okin, R. Oren, J. Randerson, W. Schlesinger, D. Lettenmaier, D.
Major, L. Poff, S. Running, L. Hansen, D. Inouye, B.P. Kelly, L Meyerson, B. Peterson, and R.
Shaw. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, USA.
[3] USGCRP (2014). Horton, R., G. Yohe, W. Easterling, R. Kates, M. Ruth, E. Sussman, A.
Whelchel, D. Wolfe, and F. Lipschultz, 2014: Ch. 16: Northeast. Climate Change Impacts in the
United States: The Third National Climate Assessment, J. M. Melillo, Terese (T.C.) Richmond,
and G. W. Yohe, Eds., U.S. Global Change Research Program, 16-1-nn.

