NewsroomA

HOME > ARTICLES > ANXIETY > THE IMPORTANCE OF MENTAL HEALTH AWARENESS

THE IMPORTANCE OF MENTAL
HEALTH AWARENESS
By: Jean Holthaus, LISW, LMSW









Mental illnesses affect 19% of the adult population, 46% of teenagers and 13% of
children each year. People struggling with their mental health may be in your family,
live next door, teach your children, work in the next cubicle or sit in the same church
pew.
However, only half of those affected receive treatment, often because of the stigma
attached to mental health. Untreated, mental illness can contribute to higher medical
expenses, poorer performance at school and work, fewer employment opportunities
and increased risk of suicide.

What Exactly is a Mental Illness
A mental illness is a physical illness of the brain that causes disturbances in thinking,
behavior, energy or emotion that make it difficult to cope with the ordinary demands
of life. Research is starting to uncover the complicated causes of these diseases
Privacy - Terms

which can include genetics, brain chemistry, brain structure, experiencing trauma
and/or having another medical condition, like heart disease.
The two most common mental health conditions are:

NewsroomA

Anxiety Disorders – More than 18% of adults each year struggle
with some type of anxiety disorder , including post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD),
panic disorder (panic attacks), generalized anxiety disorder and
specific phobias .
Mood Disorders – Mood disorders, such as depression and
bipolar depression , affect nearly 10% of adults each year and
are characterized by difficulties in regulating one’s mood.

What You Can Do to Help

Although the general perception of mental illness has improved over the past
decades, studies show that stigma against mental illness is still powerful, largely due
to media stereotypes and lack of education, and that people tend to attach negative
stigmas to mental health conditions at a far higher rate than to other diseases and
disabilities, such as cancer, diabetes or heart disease.
Stigma affects not only the number seeking treatment, but also the number of
resources available for proper treatment. Stigma and misinformation can feel like
overwhelming obstacles for someone who is struggling with a mental health
condition. Here a few powerful things you can do to help:
Showing individuals respect and acceptance removes a significant barrier to
successfully coping with their illness. Having people see you as an individual and
not as your illness can make the biggest difference for someone who is struggling
with their mental health.
Advocating within our circles of influence helps ensure these individuals have the
same rights and opportunities as other members of your church, school and
community.
Learning more about mental health allows us to provide helpful support to those
affected in our families and communities.

