MAY 4, 2023

Why Mental Health Awareness Is
Important
Home » Blog » Why Mental Health Awareness Is Important

Mental health awareness is one of the leading topics in social media and in
the news. Long gone are the days of “If you don’t talk about it, it will go away.”
Those not understanding that stigma is attached to mental illness want to
know, “Why is mental health awareness important?” Education proves
important for them and everyone. People need to open up about their own
mental illness. As a result, mental health awareness becomes more accepted
and understood. Change has been slow in coming. However, developments
have been made in the mental health community to prove mental illness is a
true medical illness.

ADMISSIONS

(877) 895-3231
Privacy - Terms

What Is Mental Health Awareness?
Mental health awareness helps reduce the stigma around mental health
issues. By sharing experiences, vulnerabilities, and concerns, the public can
learn that mental illness can be treated. This will help countless others who
may be dealing with depression, anxiety, PTSD, bipolar disorder, and more. As
awareness raises the number of people seeking help and allows individuals to
accept their own mental health problems. Breaking the stigma will allow more
people to reach out for help when they feel alone, isolated, or desperate.

Why Mental Health Awareness Is Important
Promoting mental health awareness involves having conversations and
leaving the stigma behind. Educating yourself and others about mental health
has numerous benefits, including staying aware of your own concerns and
providing support for others who may be struggling with mental illness.
ADMISSIONS

(877) 895-3231

Through awareness, people can learn how to talk about mental health and
feel comfortable reaching out for help. Ultimately, mental health awareness is
a two-way street that benefits everyone involved.

How You Can Raise Mental Health Awareness
Getting involved in mental health awareness can be a powerful way to help
reduce the stigma surrounding mental health issues and support those who
are struggling. One great way to get involved is by participating in mental
health awareness month in May. Here are other ways you can get involved:
Volunteering with mental health organizations like National Alliance on
Mental Illness or the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention.
Sharing resources and information about mental health on social media or
in your community.
Attending mental health events and conferences.
Forming a mental health support group in your community.
Fundraising for mental health organizations.
Participating in mental health advocacy efforts and lobbying for improved
mental health policies in government.

ADMISSIONS

(877) 895-3231

Mental Health Disorders That Need More Awareness
All mental health disorders benefit from receiving awareness. However, some
are less familiar than others. People still make jokes and take lightly the
severity of these mental health disorders. This can cause damage to those
who suffer. Joking about mental health carries on the old stigmas mental
health awareness tries to dispel. Causing people to suffer in silence only
carries on the negativity stigma pushes on people who are struggling. Some of
the less understood mental illnesses include:
Bipolar Disorder: Formerly known as manic-depressive illness or manic
depression, bipolar disorder has three different types. This disorder causes
difficult shifts in mood, energy, concentration, and the disrupts the ability to
take care of daily responsibilities
Anxiety: Several types of anxiety disorders exist. They all begin with the
same problem of having overwhelming fear and anxiety that rules your life.
Anxiety is so extreme it affects work, relationships, school, and life in
general. Panic disorder, phobias, and social phobias all belong to the
family of anxiety disorders.
Substance Use Disorder: These disorders indicate recurrent and abusive
use of alcohol and drugs. People often use them to self-medicate
symptoms of mental illness. In fact, about half of people who have a
mental illness also deal with addiction to drugs or alcohol.
ADMISSIONS

(877) 895-3231

Depression: This disorder is a mood disorder. Too often, people mistake it
for being the blues or just a bad mood. The symptoms can become so
extreme that they interfere with life and the ability to carry out regular
responsibilities.
PTSD: Many people don’t know they have post-traumatic stress disorder,
attributing their fears and phobias to normal feelings and standard
behavior. Too many individuals go through life with undiagnosed PTSD,
leading to severe struggles and issues with making friends, socializing,
expressing emotions, or communicating with others.
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder: OCD can greatly impact an individual’s
entire life, especially if it goes undiagnosed and untreated. The obsessive
thoughts and compulsive behaviors can consume a person’s time and
energy, making it difficult to carry out everyday tasks, maintain
relationships, and perform well at work or school.
Eating Disorders: Eating disorders can have serious physical and mental
health consequences and can be life-threatening. Raising awareness
about eating disorders can help promote early intervention and encourage
individuals to seek help.
Schizophrenia: Schizophrenia can be difficult to diagnose, often leading to
misperceptions and mislabeling by society. This misperception can result
in individuals not receiving the proper mental health care they need and, in
some cases, may even result in aggressive police intervention.
Schizophrenia is often perceived as other conditions such as drug
addiction, depression, or personality disorders, which can lead to
inappropriate treatment and care.
Personality Disorders: These disorders cause individuals to have unusual
and long-term depressive thought patterns, affecting all aspects of their
life.
ADHD: This neurodevelopmental disorder affects over 16 million people in
the US, making it hard to focus, control impulsive behaviors, and struggle to
resist addictive behaviors.
ADMISSIONS

(877) 895-3231

How Mental Health Awareness Can Break the Stigma
Breaking the stigma is why mental health awareness is important in today’s
world. Knowing you are not alone when experiencing a mental illness is
encouraging and leads to strength and commitment in getting treatment for
relief of symptoms. Millions of people in the world are dealing with symptoms
of a mental illness and having support is crucial in recovery. No longer are
people hiding in the shadows, ashamed to speak out and say that they are
overly anxious, depressed, or have phobias. People are not considered crazy,
mental, or losing their minds when they break the stigma and speak out on
mental health.

How Mental Health Awareness Can Lower Police
Involvement
Police are frequently called when individuals with mental illness are perceived
as violent and dangerous, leading to the public relying on law enforcement to
deescalate mental health crises. The American Psychiatric Association reports
that most individuals with a mental illness are not violent, and using law
enforcement to address these situations reinforces the stigma that they are. In
reality, those with mental illness are more likely to be victims of crime rather
ADMISSIONS

than perpetrators.

(877) 895-3231

Another study by the Treatment Advocacy Center reveals that individuals with
untreated severe mental health disorders are 16 times more likely to be killed
during an encounter with police than other civilians. Despite being fewer than 1
in 50 adults in the United States, people with untreated severe mental illness
are involved in a significant portion of fatal police shootings, ranging from 1 in
4 to as much as half of all cases.
By promoting mental health awareness, the public can be educated before
escalating a mental health crisis into a response from police. For individuals
experiencing a mental health crisis, police intervention may not be helpful and
could even exacerbate the situation, especially for those with schizophrenia.
Quickly research local mental health crisis hotlines or you can always call the
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline.

What Does A Solid Mental Health Foundation Look
Like?
When it comes to mental health, a strong foundation enables you to establish
a positive sense of self and cope with daily life stressors. You can maintain
healthy and productive relationships, remain motivated, and physically active,
and achieve your full potential. Furthermore, you can contribute to your
community and be more productive in school or work.

What To Do If You are Struggling with a Mental Health
Disorder
Recognizing the importance of mental health awareness is crucial if you’re
dealing with a mental health disorder. There’s no need to feel ashamed or stay
silent when you need support and encouragement. Reach out to your family
and friends, share your concerns and seek their support. Co-occurring
disorders, where mental illness exists alongside addiction, can be treated
ADMISSIONS

(877) 895-3231

