Keep up to date




Sign up for news and information about taking part and shaping research.

Home

Articles

Health research breakthroughs

Five amazing health research breakthroughs in the last 12
months
As unprecedented times highlight the importance of health research, we’re
looking back over some of the most incredible advances from the National
Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) in 2020-2021 so far.
Have you become more interested in health research over the last year? If so,
you’re not alone.

With the COVID-19 pandemic putting a spotlight on the nation’s wellbeing, more
of us than ever are realising the importance of medical research – and coming to
understand the vital role it plays in shaping our society and healthcare systems.

Why is health research so important?
Health research is critical to making sure that we’re providing the best possible
care for everyone – both today, and in the future.
Whether our knowledge is gained through clinical trials, equipment testing,
surveys, questionnaires or data analysis, the answers we find help us improve our
processes, healthcare and make positive change.
In fact, some of the most important medical discoveries over the past 80 years –
including aspirin, penicillin and the contraceptive pill – would never have come
about if it weren’t for the hard work of scientists, researchers and volunteers.

As the nation’s largest funder of health and care research, the NIHR is dedicated to
gathering the robust knowledge which makes such discoveries possible.
It’s thanks to health research that we’re able to:
Improve diagnosis time and accuracy
Better understand how to prevent conditions from developing
Fight new strains of viruses
Provide life-saving treatments and procedures
Ease suffering and improve care

Five amazing health research
breakthroughs

1. The Oxford/AstraZeneca COVID-19 Vaccine
It was the discovery the world had been waiting for: in 2020, the
Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine was found to be effective at preventing COVID-19
and offering a high level of protection.

Key facts
The vaccine was developed by biopharmaceutical company AstraZeneca
alongside the University of Oxford. Development of the vaccine was funded
by the UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) and the Department of Health and
Social Care through the NIHR.
Clinical trials enrolled more than 24,000 participants from around the world –
from the UK to South Africa.
The vaccine was made from a weakened version of a common cold virus
(adenovirus), genetically modified to be unable to grow in humans.
Trials showed that the vaccine was 70.4% effective – or 90% effective when
administered in a half dose followed by a full dose – and that it could also
prevent transmission.
Within just 5 months of being approved, around 17 million people in the UK
and EU had received a dose of this life-saving vaccine

2. The human liver repaired using lab-grown cells
In 2021, in the first procedure of its kind, researchers demonstrated a new
technique to show that a damaged human liver could be repaired with mini bileducts grown in a lab.
Key facts
With a shortage of liver donors, researchers supported by the NIHR
Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre aimed to develop an alternative to
transplantations.
Malfunctioning bile ducts, which act as the organ’s waste disposal system, are
the cause of 70% of liver transplants in children, and a third in adults.
The researchers used this technique to grow new ‘mini-bile ducts’ in the lab.
Research showed that biliary cells from the human gallbladder could be
converted into bile duct cells to replace and repair the damaged bile ducts.
This is the first time a procedure of this kind has been used on human organs
and this breakthrough could increase the number of suitable donor livers.
This approach could also be applied to range of organs and diseases, to further
accelerate cell-based therapy research.

3. The super effective single-dose breast cancer treatment
Led by researchers at University College London in 2020, a pioneering breast
cancer therapy was found to be as effective as conventional treatment – while
taking just 30 minutes.
Key facts
The study was funded by the NIHR’s Health Technology Assessment
Programme and Cancer Research UK, and involved 32 hospitals in ten
countries.
Results confirmed the effectiveness of Target Intraoperative Radiotherapy
(TARGIT-IORT), a treatment which is delivered directly after tumour removal
and which acts as both surgery and radiation treatment at once.
TARGIT-IORT works via a small ball containing a single dose placed inside the
breast.
The conventional treatment for breast cancer – external beam radiotherapy
(EBRT) – takes 3-6 weeks of daily treatment; TARGIT-IORT takes just 20-30
minutes.
TARGIT-IORT also has fewer radiation-related side effects, a better cosmetic
outcome and leads to a substantial reduction in deaths from causes other than
breast cancer.

4. The steroids and arthritis drugs saving the lives of COVID-19 patients
Researchers on the NIHR-funded and supported RECOVERY study (Randomised
Evaluation of COVID-19 therapy) which examined multiple drugs and their effects
on COVID-19 recovery for hospitalised patients, discovered that the steroid
dexamethasone and the arthritis treatment tocilizumab were able to dramatically
reduce the risk of death for patients with severe COVID-19.
Key facts
In 2020, the dexamethasone study compared the results of 2104 patients
randomly selected to receive dexamethasone once per day for ten days, and
4321 patients randomly selected to receive usual care alone
Dexamethasone was found to reduce the risk of 28-day mortality by 17%,
with a significant trend showing greatest benefit among those on ventilators
Dexamethasone has since been reported to have saved 22,000 lives in the UK
and an estimated one million worldwide in the treatment of COVID-19
In 2021, tocilizumab was found to reduce the length of hospital admission and
the risk of patients requiring mechanical ventilation
2022 patients were randomly allocated to receive tocilizumab by intravenous
injection. Results were compared with 2094 patients randomly allocated to
usual care alone.
The study showed that for every 25 patients treated with tocilizumab, one
additional life would be saved.
Read more about the dexamethasone study and the tocilizumab study

5. The oral antibiotic advancing cystic fibrosis treatment
The conclusion of a 10-year trial in 2020 revealed that oral antibiotics could
successfully be used to treat a common cystic fibrosis complication at home.
Key facts
The study was funded by NIHR, sponsored by University Hospitals Bristol and
Weston NHS Foundation Trust, and developed with researchers from The
University of Nottingham’s School of Medicine.

